Tutorial for scalar PDS (#144)
SKopecz/PositiveIntegrators.jl: docs/src/scalar_pds.md

The conservation property requires that the system consists of at least two scalar differential equations. 
Nevertheless, we can also apply the idea of the Patankar-trick to a scalar production-destruction system (PDS)

```math
u'(t)=p(u(t))-d(u(t)),\quad u(0)=u_0>0
```

with nonnegative functions ``p`` and ``d``.
Since conservation is not an issue here, we can apply the Patankar-trick to the destruction term ``d`` to ensure positivity and leave the production term ``p`` unweighted. 
A first order scheme of this type, based on the forward Euler method, reads

```math
u^{n+1}= u^n + Δ t p(u^n) - Δ t d(u^n)\frac{u^{n+1}}{u^n}
```
and this idea can easily be generalized to higher order explicit Runge-Kutta schemes. 

By closer inspection we realize that this is exactly the approach the MPRK schemes of [PositiveIntegrators.jl](https://github.com/SKopecz/PositiveIntegrators.jl) use to solve non-conservative PDS for which the production matrix is diagonal. 
Hence, we can use the existing schemes to solve a scalar PDS by regarding the production term as a ``1×1``-matrix and the destruction term as a ``1``-vector.

> # [Example 1](@id example-1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [Example 1](@id scalar-example-1)
```

We want to solve

```math
u' =  u^2 - u,\quad u(0) = 0.95
```

for ``0≤ t≤ 10``.
Here,  we can choose ``p(u)=u^2`` as production term and ``d(u)=u`` as destruction term.
The exact solution of this problem is

```math
u(t) = \frac{19}{19+e^{t}}.
```

Next, we show how to solve this scalar PDS in the way discussed above.

> Please note that must use [`PDSProblem`](@ref) to create the problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that you must use [`PDSProblem`](@ref) to create the problem;
[`ConservativePDSProblem`](@ref) does not work since the problem is not conservative.
```

Furthermore, we use static matrices and vectors from [StaticArrays.jl](https://juliaarrays.github.io/StaticArrays.jl/stable/) instead of standard arrays for efficiency.

> ```@example example_1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```@example scalar_example_1
```

using PositiveIntegrators, StaticArrays, Plots

u0 = @SVector [0.95] # 1-vector
tspan = (0.0, 10.0)

# Attention: Input u is a 1-vector
prod(u, p, t) = @SMatrix [u[1]^2] # create static 1x1-matrix
dest(u, p, t) = @SVector [u[1]] # create static 1-vector
prob = PDSProblem(prod, dest, u0, tspan) 

sol = solve(prob, MPRK22(1.0))

# plot

> tt = collect(0:0.1:10)
> f(t) = 19.0 ./ (19.0 .+ exp.(t)) # exact solution
> plot(tt, f(tt), label="exact")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tt = 0:0.1:10
f(t) = 19.0 / (19.0 + exp(t)) # exact solution
plot(tt, f.(tt), label="exact")
```

plot!(sol, label="u")
```

> # [Example 2] (@id example-2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [Example 2] (@id scalar-example-2)
```

Next, we want to compute positive solutions of a more challenging scalar PDS. 

> In [Example 1](@ref example-1) we could have also used standard schemes from [OrdinaryDiffEq.jl](https://docs.sciml.ai/OrdinaryDiffEq/stable/) and use the solver option `isoutofdomain` to ensure positivity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [Example 1](@ref scalar-example-1), we could have also used standard schemes from [OrdinaryDiffEq.jl](https://docs.sciml.ai/OrdinaryDiffEq/stable/) and use the solver option `isoutofdomain` to ensure positivity.
```

But this is not always the case as the following example will show.

We want to compute the nonnegative solution of 

```math
u'(t) = -\sqrt{\lvert u(t)\rvert },\quad u(0)=1. 
```

for ``t≥ 0``.
Please note that this initial value problem has infinitely many solutions

```math 
u(t) = \begin{cases} \frac{1}{4}(t-2)^2, & 0≤ t< 2,\\ 0, & 2≤ t < t^*,\\ -\frac{1}{4}(t-2)^2, & t^*≤  t, \end{cases}
```

where ``t^*≥ 2`` is arbitrary.
But among these, the only nonnegative solution is

```math 
u(t) = \begin{cases} \frac{1}{4}(t-2)^2, & 0≤ t< 2,\\ 0, & 2≤ t. \end{cases}
```

> And it is this solution that we want to compute. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the solution we want to compute.
```

First, we try this using a standard solver from [OrdinaryDiffEq.jl](https://docs.sciml.ai/OrdinaryDiffEq/stable/).
We try to enforce positivity with the solver option `isoutofdomain` by specifying that negative solution components are not acceptable.

```@example
using OrdinaryDiffEqRosenbrock

tspan = (0.0, 3.0)
u0 = 1.0

f(u, p, t) = -sqrt(abs(u))
prob = ODEProblem(f, u0, tspan)

sol = solve(prob, Rosenbrock23(); isoutofdomain = (u, p, t) -> any(<(0), u))
```

We see that `isoutofdomain` cannot be used to ensure nonnegative solutions in this case, as the computation stops at about ``t≈ 2`` before the desired final time is reached. 

> At least for first and second order explicit Runge-Kutta schemes this can also be shown analytically. A short computation reveals that to ensure nonnegative solutions the time step size must tend to zero if the numerical solution tends to zero. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For at least first- and second-order explicit Runge-Kutta schemes, this can also be shown analytically. A brief computation reveals that to ensure nonnegative solutions, the time step size must tend to zero if the numerical solution tends to zero.
```

Is this published somewhere?

> Next, we want try to use an MPRK scheme. We can choose ``p(u)=0`` as production term and ``d(u)=\sqrt{\lvert u\rvert }`` as destruction term. Furthermore, we proceed as in [Example 1](@ref example-1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we want to use an MPRK scheme. We can choose ``p(u)=0`` as the production term and ``d(u)=\sqrt{\lvert u\rvert }`` as the destruction term. Furthermore, we will proceed as outlined in [Example 1](@ref scalar-example-1)
```

Author: Applied in https://github.com/SKopecz/PositiveIntegrators.jl/pull/144/commits/02bd36ab9e95253361eb8579dccda2dbba7609a5

```@example
using PositiveIntegrators, StaticArrays, Plots

tspan = (0.0, 3.0)
u0 = @SVector [1.0]

prod(u, p, t) = @SMatrix zeros(1,1)
dest(u, p, t) = @SVector [sqrt(abs(first(u)))]
prob = PDSProblem(prod, dest, u0, tspan)

sol = solve(prob, MPRK22(1.0))

# plot

> tt = collect(0:0.03:3)
> f(t) = 0.25 * (t .- 2.0) .^ 2 .* (t .<= 2) # exact solution
> plot(tt, f(tt), label="exact")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tt = 0:0.03:3
f(t) = 0.25 * (t - 2)^2 * (t <= 2) # exact solution
plot(tt, f.(tt), label="exact")
```

plot!(sol, label="u")
```

> We see that the used MPRK scheme is well suited to solve the problem. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see that the MPRK scheme used is well suited to solve the problem. 
```

Author: https://github.com/SKopecz/PositiveIntegrators.jl/pull/144/commits/557c2b3380b15da09c58876a1b14478ebd0e8744

## Package versions

These results were obtained using the following versions.

> ```@example example_1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```@example scalar_example_1
```

using InteractiveUtils
versioninfo()
println()

using Pkg
Pkg.status(["PositiveIntegrators", "SparseArrays"],

>            mode=PKGMODE_MANIFEST)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pkg.status(["PositiveIntegrators", "Staticrrays", "OrdinaryDiffEqRosenbrock"],
           mode = PKGMODE_MANIFEST)
```

Author: Applied in https://github.com/SKopecz/PositiveIntegrators.jl/pull/144/commits/557c2b3380b15da09c58876a1b14478ebd0e8744.
